UNIT I
Force System: Introduction, force, principle of transmissibility of force, resultant of a force system, resolution of a force, moment of force about a line, Varigon’s theorem, couple, resolution of force into force and a couple, properties of couple and their application to engineering problems. Equilibrium: Force body diagram, equations of equilibrium and their applications to engineering problems, equilibrium of two force and three force members. Distributed Forces: Determination of center of gravity, center of mass and centroid by direct integration and by the method of composite bodies, mass moment of inertia and area moment of inertia by direct integration and composite bodies method, radius of gyration, parallel axis theorem, polar moment of inertial.

UNIT II
Structure: Plane truss, perfect and imperfect truss, assumption in the truss analysis, analysis of perfect plane trusses by the method of joints, method of section and graphical method. Friction: Static and Kinetic friction, laws of dry friction, co-efficient of friction, angle of friction, angle of repose, cone of friction, frictional lock, friction in flat pivot and collar bearing, friction in flat belts.

UNIT III
Kinematics of Particles: Rectilinear motion, plane curvilinear motion, rectangular coordinate, normal and tangential coordinates. Kinetics of Particles: Equation of motion, rectilinear motion and curvilinear motion, work-energy equation, conservation of energy, concept of impulse and momentum, conservation of momentum, impact of bodies, co-efficient of restitution, loss of energy during impact.

UNIT IV
Kinematics of Rigid Bodies: Concept of rigid body, types of rigid body motion, absolute motion, introduction to relative velocity, relative acceleration (Corioli component excluded) and instantaneous center of zero velocity, Velocity and acceleration. Kinetics of Rigid Bodies: Equation of motion, translatory motion and fixed axis rotation, application of work energy principles to rigid bodies conservation of energy. Beam: Introduction, types of loading, methods for the reactions of a beam, space diagram, types of end supports, beams subjected to couple.